---
title: "Statiscial Natural Language Processing"
collection: teaching
type: "Graduate course"
permalink: /teaching/snlp2019
venue: "Leibniz University of Hannover"
date: 2019-10-01
course page: <a href="http://l3s.de/~fetahu/courses/nlp_course_ws2019/"> page</a>
location: "Hannover, Germany"
---

Natural language is fundamental to communication. Language differs in genre, complexity and style that is dependent on the speaker or author of a text. Natural language processing is one of the most important technologies in our age, whose aim is to understand language constructs similar as to how humans process language. NLP is inherently difficult as most of such language constructs depend on the context in which they are said or written, the speaker or author, or the subject of the language utterances. NLP thus has applications to web search, advertisement, emails, language translation etc. 

In this course, the main learning outcomes include an overview and understanding of mathematical foundations, e.g. probability theory. Linguistic essentials, such as syntactic and semantic analysis of text, where focus is given on part-of-speech tagging, dependency parsing, phrase extraction, and formalize context free grammars for the English language. Next, we will dive into statistical learning methods (e.g. Hidden Markov Models and Logistic Regression) and cutting-edge research models from deep learning which enable syntactic and semantic analysis of text. Finally, we will introduce the most prominent information extraction tasks such as: named entity recognition, named entity disambiguation and relation extraction, in which we will provide examples on how we can implement basic statistical models and state-of-the-art approaches from the deep learning field.

*	17.10.2019	Week I: Organizational aspects and recap of NLP fundamentals
* 24.10.2019	Week II: Mathematical Foundations
* 07.11.2019	Week III: Linguistic Essentials
* 14.11.2019	Week IV: Language Models
* 21.11.2019	Week V: Hidden Markov Models
* 28.11.2019	Week VI: Logistic Regression
* 05.12.2019	Week VII: Constituency Grammars and Syntactic and Statistical Parsing
* 19.12.2019	Week VIII: Dependency Parsing
* 09.01.2020	Week IX: Word Representations
* 16.01.2020	Week X: Recurrent Neural Networks -- RNN
* 23.01.2020	Week XI: The Transformers: Attention is all you need!	
